How now! who calls?
Madam, I am here.
What is your will?
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
It is an honour that I dream not of.
I'll look to like, if looking liking move
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
You kiss by the book.
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
What's he that now is going out of door?
What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Go ask his name
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed enemy.
A rhyme I learn'd even now
Of one I danced withal.
Ay me!
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
What's in a name? that which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for that name which is no part of thee
Take all myself.
What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night
So stumblest on my counsel?
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke
O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Do not swear at all;
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.
Well, do not swear
What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it
But to be frank, and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,
I do beseech thee--
By and by, I come
A thousand times good night!
Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice,
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
Romeo!
At what o'clock to-morrow
Shall I send to thee?
I will not fail
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.
'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone
Sweet, so would I
The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him
Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance
No, no
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Where is my mother! why, she is within;
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?'
Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?
I have.
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging
Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?
Can heaven be so envious?
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice
O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once!
To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?
My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
For who is living, if those two are gone?
O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!
Blister'd be thy tongue
For such a wish! he was not born to shame
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband
Wash they his wounds with tears
O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day
Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I
It is, it is
Nurse?
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days
O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb
O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle
Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
Madam, I am not well.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Feeling so the loss,
Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
What villain madam?
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--
Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named, and cannot come to him.
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that slaughter'd him!
And joy comes well in such a needy time
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Not proud, you have; but thankful, that you have
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.
Speakest thou from thy heart?
Amen!
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the friar, to know his remedy
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
What must be shall be.
To answer that, I should confess to you.
I will confess to you that I love him.
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
The tears have got small victory by that;
For it was bad enough before their spite.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!
Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of yonder tower;
Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;
Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble;
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father!
Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
And beg your pardon
I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell;
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
Ay, those attires are best
No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state to-morrow
Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
That almost freezes up the heat of life
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end
Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
This is thy sheath;
there rust, and let me die.
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.
I'll gladly learn.
Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.
Mutually.
I do confess it, and repent it, father.
I do repent me, as it is an evil,
And take the shame with joy.
Must die to-morrow! O injurious love,
That respites me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror!