
Is the day so young?
Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Not having that, which, having, makes them short.
Out--
Out of her favour, where I am in love.
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
O any thing, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,
sick health!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?
Good heart, at what?
Why, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
With more of thine
Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will
A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.
Well, in that hit you miss
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,
For beauty starved with her severity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair
O, teach me how I should forget to think.
'Tis the way
To call hers exquisite, in question more
Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that.
For your broken shin.
Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is;
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
Stay, fellow; I can read.
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady
widow of Vitravio; Signior Placentio and his lovely
nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine
uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece
Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin
Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair
assembly
Whither?
Whose house?
Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
And these, who often drown'd could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without a apology?
Give me a torch
Not I, believe me
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe
Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
A torch for me
Nay, that's not so.
And we mean well in going to this mask;
But 'tis no wit to go.
I dream'd a dream to-night.
Well, what was yours?
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Thou talk'st of nothing.
I fear, too early
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.
What is her mother?
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she
She speaks
I take thee at thy word
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am
Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls;
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do that dares love attempt;
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords
I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
And but thou love me, let them find me here
By love, who first did prompt me to inquire;
He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
I would adventure for such merchandise.
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--
What shall I swear by?
If my heart's dear love--
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard.
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
So thrive my soul--
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from
their books,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
It is my soul that calls upon my name
My dear?
At the hour of nine.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.
I would I were thy bird.
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
Good morrow, father.
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,
That's by me wounded
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
And bad'st me bury love.
I pray thee, chide not; she whom I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
The other did not so.
O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in
such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Meaning, to court'sy.
A most courteous exposition.
Pink for flower.
Why, then is my pump well flowered.
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singleness.
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match.
Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast
not there for the goose.
Nay, good goose, bite not.
And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?
I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added
to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Here's goodly gear!
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
mar.
I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when
you have found him than he was when you sought him
What hast thou found?
I will follow you.
A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
to in a month.
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
protest unto thee--
What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.
Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
Go to; I say you shall.
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall
What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.
Commend me to thy lady.
Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting
I do protest, I never injured thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.
I thought all for the best.
This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation stain'd
With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!
This day's black fate on more days doth depend;
This but begins the woe, others must end.
Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company
This shall determine that.
O, I am fortune's fool!
Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?
What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?
Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;'
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,
And world's exile is death
'Tis torture, and not mercy
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel
Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.
Nurse!
Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
Doth she not think me an old murderer,
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
How well my comfort is revived by this!
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale
Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads
More light and light; more dark and dark our woes!
Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand
Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!
Thou know'st my lodging
Tush, thou art deceived
No matter
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murders in this loathsome world,
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
Fly hence, and leave me
Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet
Where should this music be? i' the air or the earth?
It sounds no more
The ditty does remember my drown'd father.
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.
Most sure, the goddess
On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer
May know if you remain upon this island;
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here
My language! heavens!
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Were I but where 'tis spoken.
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
And that he does I weep
Yes, faith, and all his lords; the Duke of Milan
And his brave son being twain.
O, if a virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
The queen of Naples.
No, as I am a man.
No;
I will resist such entertainment till
Mine enemy has more power.
Draws, and is charmed from moving
So they are;
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wreck of all my friends, nor this man's threats,
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid
There be some sports are painful, and their labour
Delight in them sets off
O most dear mistress,
The sun will set before I shall discharge
What I must strive to do.
No, precious creature;
I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
Than you should such dishonour undergo,
While I sit lazy by.
No, noble mistress;'tis fresh morning with me
When you are by at night. I do beseech you--
Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers--
What is your name?
Admired Miranda!
Indeed the top of admiration! worth
What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
I have eyed with best regard and many a time
The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear
I am in my condition
A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king;
I would, not so!--and would no more endure
This wooden slavery than to suffer
The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak
O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound
And crown what I profess with kind event
If I speak true! if hollowly, invert
What best is boded me to mischief! I
Beyond all limit of what else i' the world
Do love, prize, honour you.
Wherefore weep you?
My mistress, dearest;
And I thus humble ever.
Ay, with a heart as willing
As bondage e'er of freedom
A thousand thousand!
I do believe it
Against an oracle.
As I hope
For quiet days, fair issue and long life,
With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den,
The most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion.
Our worser genius can, shall never melt
Mine honour into lust, to take away
The edge of that day's celebration
When I shall think
I warrant you sir;
The white cold virgin snow upon my heart
Abates the ardour of my liver.
This is a most majestic vision, and
Harmoniously charmingly. May I be bold
To think these spirits?
Let me live here ever;
So rare a wonder'd father and a wife
Makes this place Paradise.
Juno and Ceres whisper, and send Iris on employment
This is strange
No, my dear'st love,
I would not for the world.
Though the seas threaten, they are merciful;
I have cursed them without cause.
Kneels
Sir, she is mortal;
But by immortal Providence she's mine
Where should this music be? i' the air or the earth?
It sounds no more
The ditty does remember my drown'd father.
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.
Most sure, the goddess
On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer
May know if you remain upon this island;
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here
My language! heavens!
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Were I but where 'tis spoken.
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
And that he does I weep
Yes, faith, and all his lords; the Duke of Milan
And his brave son being twain.
O, if a virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
The queen of Naples.
No, as I am a man.
No;
I will resist such entertainment till
Mine enemy has more power.
Draws, and is charmed from moving
So they are;
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wreck of all my friends, nor this man's threats,
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid
There be some sports are painful, and their labour
Delight in them sets off
O most dear mistress,
The sun will set before I shall discharge
What I must strive to do.
No, precious creature;
I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
Than you should such dishonour undergo,
While I sit lazy by.
No, noble mistress;'tis fresh morning with me
When you are by at night. I do beseech you--
Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers--
What is your name?
Admired Miranda!
Indeed the top of admiration! worth
What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
I have eyed with best regard and many a time
The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear
I am in my condition
A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king;
I would, not so!--and would no more endure
This wooden slavery than to suffer
The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak
O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound
And crown what I profess with kind event
If I speak true! if hollowly, invert
What best is boded me to mischief! I
Beyond all limit of what else i' the world
Do love, prize, honour you.
Wherefore weep you?
My mistress, dearest;
And I thus humble ever.
Ay, with a heart as willing
As bondage e'er of freedom
A thousand thousand!
I do believe it
Against an oracle.
As I hope
For quiet days, fair issue and long life,
With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den,
The most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion.
Our worser genius can, shall never melt
Mine honour into lust, to take away
The edge of that day's celebration
When I shall think
I warrant you sir;
The white cold virgin snow upon my heart
Abates the ardour of my liver.
This is a most majestic vision, and
Harmoniously charmingly. May I be bold
To think these spirits?
Let me live here ever;
So rare a wonder'd father and a wife
Makes this place Paradise.
Juno and Ceres whisper, and send Iris on employment
This is strange
No, my dear'st love,
I would not for the world.
Though the seas threaten, they are merciful;
I have cursed them without cause.
Kneels
Sir, she is mortal;
But by immortal Providence she's mine